 
5 
Problem 4: (16 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consider applying critical-word first and early restart techniques to reduce miss penalty in a system with 
L1 and L2 caches. Originally, in a cache miss scenario, the processor continues only when the entire 
block with the critical word is loaded into the cache. 
 
In this problem, a word is 8 Bytes wide. 
 
Question A: (8 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First, we have an L2 cache with 1MB capacity and 64-Byte block size. With critical-word first, it takes 
110 CCs to get the first word from memory. Otherwise, the time to receive the first word from memory is 
90 CCs, and each additional word from the main memory requires 10 CCs. Further assume that the 
probability of referencing the first word in a block of L2 cache is 30% while the rest ones are referenced 
with equal probability. 
 
How many CCs would it take on average to service an L2 cache miss for 1) with neither critical-
word first nor early restart, 2) with early restart only, and 3) with both critical-word first and early 
restart? Please provide your calculation process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question B: (4 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For this question, ignore Question A. The following paragraph is a brief analysis regarding L1 cache. 
Fill in the blank with the most appropriate integers: 
 
Next, we have an L1 cache with 32 KB capacity and 32-Byte block size. To simplify the question, we 
only use the average L2 cache access time, i.e., we ignore how different situations of L2 cache access 
may affect L1 cache access. With critical-word first, it takes 27 CCs to get the first word from L2 cache. 
Otherwise, the time to receive the first word from L2 cache is                      CCs, and each additional 
word from the main memory requires 4 CCs. Further assume that the probability of referencing every 
word in a block of L1 cache is the same. Then, applying both critical-word first and early restart can 
reduce                     % of average time for the original case without either critical-word first or early 
restart to service an L1 cache miss; applying only early restart can reduce 20% of average time for the 
original case to service an L1 cache miss. 
 
Question C: (4 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Would critical-word first and early restart be more important for L1 or L2 cache? Why? What 
factors would contribute to their relative importance? You may refer to your observations while 
solving Questions A and B. 
 
Hint: the solution is not fixed as long as it makes sense, but there must be at least one reason, and 
your answer and reason(s) must be consistent. 
 
 
 
