 
6 
Problem 5: (45 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important Notice: the following tutorial has been tested on student04.cse.nd.edu. Due to certain 
issues of operating systems, libraries, etc., Multi2Sim DOES NOT work on other student machines. 
In other words, you have to share student04 for this problem. This is yet another reason you should 
finish your homework ASAP: a lot of students will flow to these two student machines all together 
before due, causing performance and even connection issues. 
 
We have already known basic usages of Multi2Sim in Homework 1. On top of that, it is possible to 
change the configuration of a cache and study its impact on program performance with Multi2Sim. To 
get started, download and extract necessary files at your home directory on a CSE student machine: 
 
wget https://notredame.box.com/shared/static/nok9rzzbc9d59jbs7jgm5xb5h0rhrltm.tar 
-O hw2.tar 
tar -xvf hw2.tar 
 
At the beginning of hw2/mem-config, you can see the configurations of L1 cache: 
 
head hw2/mem-config -n 7 
 
Output: 
 
[CacheGeometry geo-l1] 
Sets = 256 
Assoc = 2 
BlockSize = 8 
Latency = 2 
Policy = LRU 
Ports = 2 
 
Note: you may also use cat hw2/mem-config or vim hw2/mem-config to check the content of a file. 
 
Here, the first line is the name of the cache. Next, Sets, Assoc, BlockSize, and Policy represent 
number of sets, associativity, number of Bytes per block, and replacement policy, respectively. For this 
example, instruction and data share this L1 cache, and LRU stands for least recently used. 
 
For this homework, you can assume that the instruction and data cache share the same configuration, 
and that there will always be an instruction AND a data cache. Below, we only focus on the data cache. 
 
An understanding of the underlying processor-memory architecture can actually make you a better 
programmer. In this problem, we’ll use matrix multiplication code as a case study. Matrix multiplication 
is common in scientific computing, graphics transformations, etc. There are two matrix multiplication 
algorithms provided: one is in hw2/no_blocking.cc, and the other is in hw2/blocking.cc. Both are 
multiplying two 120 × 120 matrices, whose original numbers are listed in hw2/mat-mat.hh. 
 
Hint: 
1. For usages of two programs, please refer to hw2/README.md or hw2/README.pdf. 
2. To better manage configuration files of different cache settings, refer to previous tutorials for copying, 
renaming, and editing files remotely, or uploading files you locally create and edit. For instance, to 
prepare the configuration files for cache setting #1 of Question B, create a new directory (suppose you 
start at the home directory after extraction) and copy files: 
 
cd hw2 
