Instructions: Finish the following exercise questions. You can utilize Google search and read articles that help you to answer the questions. But you cannot just copy the answers, put the answers in your own way. The total is 100 pts.

 

Ex. 1.1 (5pts) | What is the role of the magic number for binary executable files? Where is it stored?

 

Ex. 1.2 (5pts) | List all segments that consist of an address space and explain each segment.

 

Ex. 1.3 (5pts) | What are von-Neumann machines, and how are they related to the computers we use today?

 

Ex. 1.4 (5pts) | Anyone who programmed in Unix environment using C or C++ (or other languages as well) surely experienced the famous error message \segmentation fault (core dumped)." Explain what this error message mean and list possible reason for this error. What does \segmentation" mean in this context? What does \core" mean in this context?

 

Ex. 1.5 (5pts) | When a compiler generates the binary code for a source program written in a high-level programming language, it does not know where and how the binary code will be loaded by the operating system. Why not? In order to generate a binary code, the compiler, however, must make certain assumptions on where and how the binary code will be loaded in the main program by the operating system. What are the reasonable assumptions that are made by most of compilers in terms of where and how?

 

Ex. 1.6 (5pts) | What happens when we double-click a program icon? Or type a command at the prompt? Describe all the steps happening in OS until we see the application on the screen.

 

Ex. 1.7 (5pts) | Finding the physical address from a virtual address in a contiguous memory allocation scheme.

 

Ex. 1.8 (5pts) | What is the round-robin scheduler?

 

Ex. 1.9 (30pts) | Pick three papers from ‘OS History and Architecture’ in the paper list. Read, summarize, and critically judge them. Write at least 1/3 page for each paper’s summarization and judgment. (10pts for each paper)

 

Ex. 1.0 (30pts) | Search for three papers on the topic of ‘OS History and Architecture’. Read, summarize, and critically judge them. Write at least 1/3 page for each paper’s summarization and judgment. (10pts for each paper)