28
}
29
30
if (WIFEXITED(status))
31
printf("parent: child %d exited with status %d\n",
32
(int) pid, WEXITSTATUS(status));
33
else if (WIFSIGNALED(status))
34
printf("parent: child %d killed by signal %d\n",
35
(int) pid, WTERMSIG(status));
36
37
return EXIT_SUCCESS;
38 }
fork() returns twice, so its return value is the only thing that tells the two processes apart, and
all three of its outcomes are handled. A negative value means no child was created. In the child
(return value 0) execvp replaces the process image with /usr/bin/ls while keeping the same pid,
searching PATH for the binary and passing a NULL-terminated argv. A successful exec never returns,
so the lines after it run only on failure, where they report the error and leave via _exit rather than
exit so the child does not flush the parent’s copy of the stdio buffers. In the parent (return value
the child’s pid) waitpid blocks until that specific child terminates, which both sequences the output
and reaps the child so it does not linger as a zombie.
Compiled with gcc -Wall -Wextra -o forkexec forkexec.c (gcc 12.2.0, Debian Linux) and run
in a directory holding two small files. The actual output was:
total 8
-rw-r--r-- 1 xing xing 1 Sep 21 16:37 alpha.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 xing xing 2 Sep 21 16:37 beta.txt
parent: child 100 exited with status 0
The first three lines come from ls after it has taken over the child, the last from the parent after
waitpid returns. Setting PATH to a directory that does not exist exercises the failure branch:
execvp:
No such file or directory, then parent:
child 107 exited with status 127.
Ex. 2.4 (5 pts) — Why a thread context switch is much cheaper
than a process one
The claim holds for two threads of the same process. Threads belonging to different processes cost
exactly what a process switch costs, because the expense comes from changing the address space,
not from changing the scheduling entity.
Threads of one process share an address space, so the switch leaves the memory map untouched:
the kernel never reloads the page-table base register (CR3 on x86, TTBR on ARM) and so never
invalidates the TLB. A process switch does both, and the register saving is the smaller half of its
bill. The larger half is indirect and is paid after the switch returns: the incoming process resumes
with a cold TLB and with caches still holding the outgoing process’s lines, and stalls while both
refill. Tagged TLBs (ARM ASIDs, x86 PCIDs) let entries for several address spaces coexist and
soften this, but do not remove it, since a different working set still displaces cached data.
A thread switch still saves and restores the small per-thread state: the register file, including the
program counter and stack pointer, and the thread’s kernel stack and control block. Per-process
4
