Algorithm 4 exit(status) — terminate the calling process
1: procedure Exit(status)
2:
for all open descriptors fd of Current do
3:
Close(fd)
▷drops the reference count; the last close releases the file
4:
end for
5:
ReleaseAddressSpace(Current.addrspace)
6:
release cwd, root, timers and file locks
7:
for all c ∈Current.children do
8:
c.parent ←init; move c to init.children
9:
if c.state = Zombie then Signal(init, SIGCHLD); Wakeup(init)
▷so init reaps it
10:
end for
11:
Current.exitstatus ←status; record CPU time and accounting in the PCB
12:
Current.state ←Zombie
▷PCB and pid stay allocated until reaped
13:
Signal(Current.parent, SIGCHLD); Wakeup(Current.parent)
14:
Schedule( )
▷picks another process; exit never returns
15: end procedure
How the four calls are inter-related
They are not four independent services but two pairs that bracket the life of a process.
fork is the only way a Unix system makes a new process, and exec is the only way a process
changes the program it runs. Neither alone can start a new program: fork produces a second copy
of the caller, exec replaces the caller’s own image. Running a new program is therefore necessarily
both of them, fork then exec in the child. The two algorithms are built to meet: fork gives the
child a duplicate descriptor table and the parent’s credentials, and exec keeps exactly that table,
less the close-on-exec entries, while discarding everything else.
The split is what makes the arrangement useful. Between fork returning 0 and exec overwriting
the image there is a window in which the child is still running the parent’s code and can rearrange
precisely the state that exec preserves. That window is where a shell implements ls > out: the
child closes descriptor 1, reopens it on the file, then execs ls, which need know nothing about
redirection.
exit and waitpid are the matching pair at the other end, and they are a pair for one reason: the
exit status has to outlive the process that produced it. exit can free the address space and the
descriptors, but it cannot free the PCB, because nobody has read the status out of it yet; so it
stores the status there, marks the process Zombie and signals the parent. waitpid is the other half
of that transaction: it finds the zombie child, copies the status out, charges its CPU time to the
parent, and only then releases the PCB and the pid. Until then the pid stays reserved, so “wait for
process p” stays unambiguous.
A shell’s main loop is the whole mechanism in one cycle: fork; the child execs the command; the
parent blocks in waitpid; the child exits and becomes a zombie; the parent’s waitpid returns with
the status, frees the PCB, and prints the next prompt.
7
